Add manual to write packages (#28)
jetstack/preflight: docs/how_to_write_packages.md

# How to write Preflight Packages

## What is a Preflight package?

A Preflight package contains the definition of a policy. A policy is a set of rules that Preflight will check in your cluster.

Preflight packages are made of two well distinguished parts, the _policy manifest_ and the _REGO_ definition of the rules.

<img align="center" width="460" height="300" src="./images/preflight_package.png">

## Writing the _policy manifest_

> The _policy manifest_ is a _YAML_ file that contains information about your policy. You can see [here](https://godoc.org/github.com/jetstack/preflight/pkg/packaging#policy manifest) the schema of this file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The _policy manifest_ is a _YAML_ file that contains information about your policy. You can see [here](https://godoc.org/github.com/jetstack/preflight/pkg/packaging#PolicyManifest) the schema of this file.
```

> The _policy manifest_ is a _YAML_ file that contains all the metadata about your policy. You can see [here](https://godoc.org/github.com/jetstack/preflight/pkg/packaging#policy manifest) the schema os this file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The _policy manifest_ is a _YAML_ file that contains all the metadata about your policy. You can see [here](https://godoc.org/github.com/jetstack/preflight/pkg/packaging#policy manifest) the schema of this file.
```

Reviewer 2: I think all the descriptions and remediations are more than just metadata.

> There is some general information about the package, as the name or the description.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There is some metadata for the package, such as the name and the description.
```

> The rules of your policy must be also declared here. They are organized in sections. Every section can have a name, a description and a list of rules.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The rules of your policy must also be declared here. They are organized in sections. Every section can have a name, a description, and a list of rules.
```

> Every rule has its own name, description, useful links and mitiation instructions. There is a dedicated section about how to add rules.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Every rule has its own name, description, useful links, and remediation instructions. This guide has a dedicated section about how to add rules.
```

### Choose your _data-gatherers_

Preflight evaluates the policies against data that it fetches from different sources. These sources are the _data-gatherers_. You can see [here](./datagatherers) a list of the available _data-gatherers_ and their documentation. In the future, Preflight will support sourcing data from external _data-gatherers_ (#24).

> The _policy manifest_ is the place where to declare which _data-gatherers_ does your package expect.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The  _data-gatherers_ your package requires should be declared in the _policy manifest_.
```

```yaml
schema-version: "1.0.0"
id: "mypackage"
namespace: "examples.jetstack.io"
package-version: "1.0.0"
data-gatherers:
- k8s/pods
- gke
...
```

### Versioning

> Preflight packages are intented to evolve. Policies can be changed, new rules can be added or deleted, and all the metadata can mutate.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Preflight packages are intended to evolve. Policies can be changed, new rules can be added or deleted, and all the metadata can mutate.
```

In order to ease keeping track of those changes, Preflight packages have a version tag. That version is specified with the `package-version` property in the _policy manifest_.

### The minimal _policy manifest_

Let's just write the minimal _policy manifest_ possible.

First, create a directory for this new package. We are going to create this new package under the `examples.jetstack.io` namespace, and we are going to name it `podsbestpractices`.

Then create the `policy-manifest.yaml` file. The following fields are mandatory:

- `schema-version`: indicates which schema is being used for the _policy manifest_. For the moment, there is only version `1.0.0`.

> - `namespace`, `id` and `package-version`: these properties identify the package. `namespace` must be a FQDN and it is encouraged that `package-version` uses semver.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `namespace`, `id`, and `package-version`: these properties identify the package. `namespace` must be a FQDN and it is encouraged that `package-version` uses semver.
```

Then, you should also declare the _data-gatherers_ that your rules are going to need. For this example, let's just use `k8s/pods`.

> Finally, it's time to declare the rules for the policy. Rules are organized into sections. Every section has an ID, a name and a description. Also, every rule has its own ID, name and description. Additionally, rules can have additional metadata like a remediation or a set of related links.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, it's time to declare the rules for the policy. Rules are organized into sections. Every section has an ID, a name, and a description. Also, every rule has its own ID, name, and description. Additionally, rules can have other metadata like remediation advice or a set of related links.
```

For simplicity's sake, this example contains just one section with one rule.

```
# preflight-packages/examples.jetstack.io/podsbestpractices/policy-manifest.yaml

schema-version: "1.0.0"
id: "podsbestpractices"
namespace: "examples.jetstack.io"
package-version: "1.0.0"
root-query: "data.pods" # the concept of `root-query` is explained later in this doc
data-gatherers:
- k8s/pods
sections:
  - id: images
    name: Images
    description: "Restrictions over the images."
    rules:
      - id: tag_not_latest
        name: "Tag is not latest"
        description: >
          Avoid using "latest" as tag for the image since.
        remediation: >
          Change your manifest and edit the Pod template so the image is pinned to a certain tag.
        links:
          - "https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/containers/images/"
```

## Writing the policy definition in REGO

In the previous section, we created the _policy manifest_, which contains a human readable description of the rules in our policy. Now it's time to define the same rules in a language that is machine readable.

### The REGO package

> Preflight relies on Open Policy Agent as the policy engine. REGO is OPA's language to define policies. You can find a comprenhensive [documentation](https://www.openpolicyagent.org/docs/latest/policy-language/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Preflight relies on Open Policy Agent as the policy engine. Rego is OPA's language to define policies. You can find a comprenhensive [documentation](https://www.openpolicyagent.org/docs/latest/policy-language/).
```

Author: For some reason, I thought REGO was all in capitals, but I have just checked the official page and that's not the case. I have replaced all the occurrences in this document.

> Preflight relies on Open Policy Agent as the policy engine. REGO is OPA's language to define policies. You can find a comprenhensive [documentation](https://www.openpolicyagent.org/docs/latest/policy-language/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Preflight relies on Open Policy Agent (OPA) as the policy engine. REGO is OPA's language to define policies. You can find a comprehensive [documentation](https://www.openpolicyagent.org/docs/latest/policy-language/).
```

> You can have multiple REGO files inside the directory of a Preflight package.  All the REGO rules corresponding to the _policy manifest_ rules must be in the same REGO package, and that package must be indicated in the _policy manifest_ using the `root-query` property.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can have multiple Rego files inside the directory of a Preflight package.  All the Rego rules corresponding to the _policy manifest_ rules must be in the same Rego package, and that package must be indicated in the _policy manifest_ using the `root-query` property.
```

Just basing this off how it's referred to here: https://www.openpolicyagent.org/docs/latest/policy-language/

> You can have multiple REGO files inside the directory of a Preflight package. One important think to take into consideration is that all the final definition of the rules must be in the same REGO package, and that package must be indicated in the _policy manifest_ using the `root-query` property.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can have multiple REGO files inside the directory of a Preflight package. All the REGO rules corresponding to the _policy manifest_ rules must be in the same REGO package, and that package must be indicated in the _policy manifest_ using the `root-query` property.
```

> For instance, these snippet shows an arbitrary REGO rule in a package named `podsbestpractices`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For instance, this snippet shows an arbitrary REGO rule in a package named `podsbestpractices`:
```

```
package pods

> import input["k8s/pods"] as pods

Reviewer: This is interesting to me. I guess this is being done so we can say, for a given rule, in a given environment (where environment means the collection of jsons from data gathers required for that rule) we know if it passes for fails.

In my mind, environment data used in policy (rule) evaluation would be loaded into the instance of OPA and made available via the data API (where the instance may or may not have been a long running process).

I haven't looked into the architecture of this yet and how exactly we're using OPA - I suspect that this will become clearer when I do.

Reviewer 2: I think it's done like this as OPA isn't used in a long running way in Preflight.

Reviewer: :+1: makes more sense now.

Author: That's right. We are not using OPA's engine as a service but just invoking it on every run.

preflight_tag_not_latest {
  true
}
```

As you can identify, the REGO package for that policy is `pods`. In this case, OPA's `root-query` is `data.pods`, and that is why in the previous section, `policy-manifest.yaml` contains `root-query: "data.pods"`.

### Writing REGO rules

> REGO can be challenging at the beginning because it does not behaves like a traditional programming language. It is strongly recommended to read ["The Basics"](https://www.openpolicyagent.org/docs/latest/policy-language/#the-basics). Also, it is useful to have the [language refence](https://www.openpolicyagent.org/docs/latest/policy-reference/) at hand.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While very expressive, Rego, as a declarative language, has something of a steep learning curve for those unfamiliar with the paradigm. It is strongly recommended to read ["The Basics"](https://www.openpolicyagent.org/docs/latest/policy-language/#the-basics). Also, it is useful to have the [language refence](https://www.openpolicyagent.org/docs/latest/policy-reference/) at hand.
```

> REGO can be challenging at the beginning because it does not behaves like a traditional programming language. It is strongly recommended to read ["The Basics"](https://www.openpolicyagent.org/docs/latest/policy-language/#the-basics). Also, it is useful to have the language refence](https://www.openpolicyagent.org/docs/latest/policy-reference/) at a hand.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
REGO can be challenging at the beginning because it does not behaves like a traditional programming language. It is strongly recommended to read ["The Basics"](https://www.openpolicyagent.org/docs/latest/policy-language/#the-basics). Also, it is useful to have the [language reference](https://www.openpolicyagent.org/docs/latest/policy-reference/) at hand.
```

> You will get faster as you write more REGO rules. In order to speed up this process, it's best to write tests for your rules, even if you think they are not needed. It means you can iterate fast while writing rules and make sure the rules are doing what you intended. It is conventional to name the test files for `policy.rego` as `policy_test.rego`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you become more familiar with Rego, expressing your requirements as rules will feel more natural. In order to speed up this process, it's best practice to write tests for your rules - it is all too easy to introduce regressions. A good test suite means you can iterate fast while writing new rules and make sure all the rules as functioning as intended. It is conventional to name the test files for `policy.rego` as `policy_test.rego`.
```

> You will get faster as you write more rules. In order to speed up this process, it usually works to write tests for your rules, even if you think it is not needed. It is just the best way of iterating fast while writing rules and making sure the rules are doing what you tried to write with REGO. It is a convention to name the test files for `policy.rego` as `policy_test.rego_`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You will get faster as you write more REGO rules. In order to speed up this process, it's best to write tests for your rules, even if you think they are not needed. It means you can iterate fast while writing rules and make sure the rules are doing what you intended. It is conventional to name the test files for `policy.rego` as `policy_test.rego`.
```

This example contains the definition for the `tag_no_latest` rule. As you can see, there is the convention within Preflight to add `preflight_` as prefix to the rule ID when that is written in Rego (related issue #27).

```
# preflight-packages/examples.jetstack.io/podsbestpractices/policy.rego

package pods

import input["k8s/pods"] as pods

default preflight_tag_not_latest = false
preflight_tag_not_latest {
  count(containers_using_latest) == 0
}

> format_container(pod, container) = name {

Reviewer: Do we need this in the example? As I'm not sure exactly how OPA is being used this information might be returned but it seems the only 'result' is `count(containers_using_latest) == 0` in `preflight_tag_not_latest` (e.g. the container names are not made visible via that rule)

Reviewer 2: We probably don't need this here. There are a few examples like this where a package's Rego rules give additional information in the output. When Preflight was a bash script it just printed the output of `opa eval`, but theres not yet any way to surface this extra information in the current implementation.

Reviewer: :+1: Tbh - this feels like an MVP feature to me. Not knowing _which_ pods are failing my resource checks isn't very helpful.

Author: I thought this was needed so in case of two containers with the same name but from a different pod can appear in `all_containers`.

Reviewer: I don't think this should hold up this PR now we have https://github.com/jetstack/preflight/issues/36 and https://github.com/jetstack/preflight/issues/37

	not preflight_tag_not_latest with input as pods([
    {
      "metadata": { "namespace": "default", "name": "p1" },
      "spec": { "containers":[
        {"name": "c1", "image": "golang"}
      ]}
    }
  ])
}
test_tag_not_latest_latest_multiple {
	not preflight_tag_not_latest with input as pods([
    {
      "metadata": { "namespace": "default", "name": "p1" },
      "spec": { "containers":[
        {"name": "c1", "image": "golang:v1"}
      ]}
    },
    {
      "metadata": { "namespace": "default", "name": "p2"},
      "spec": { "containers":[
        {"name": "c1", "image": "golang:v2"},
        {"name": "c2", "image": "golang:latest"},
      ]}
    }
  ])
}
```

Soon, Preflight will be able to run REGO tests inside Preflight packages (#26), but unfortunatelly this is not possible yet.

However it is possible to run these tests directly with the [OPA command line](https://www.openpolicyagent.org/docs/latest/#running-opa):

```
opa test ./preflight-packages/examples.jetstack.io/podsbestpractices 
```

## Lint your packages

The Preflight command line has a built-in linter. This helps to make sure that the package follows the best practices.

> You can link your package by running:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can lint your package by running:
```
